README.md, before:

# VariableAggregator for IP-Symcon

[![IP-Symcon Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/IP--Symcon-8.1+-blue.svg)](https://www.symcon.de)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)

A powerful IP-Symcon module for creating virtual devices that consolidate variables from multiple real devices with bidirectional synchronization and optional data type conversion.

**[Deutsche Version](README.de.md)**

---

## Table of Contents

- [Features](#features)
- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
  - [Variable Mappings](#variable-mappings)
- [Variables](#variables)
- [PHP Functions](#php-functions)
- [Use Cases](#use-cases)
- [License](#license)

---

## Features

- **Variable Consolidation**: Aggregate variables from multiple real devices into a single virtual device
- **Bidirectional Synchronization**: 
  - Changes to source variables are automatically reflected in virtual variables
  - Changes to virtual variables can be synced back to source variables
  - Configurable sync direction per variable (bidirectional, from source only, to source only)
- **Data Type Conversion**:
  - Convert between Boolean, Integer, Float, and String types
  - Automatic intelligent type conversion with sensible defaults
  - Useful for integrating incompatible devices or creating unified interfaces
- **Flexible Naming**: Custom names and descriptions for each virtual variable
- **Standalone Variables**: Create virtual variables without a source for manual control
- **Action Support**: Virtual variables with bidirectional sync can be controlled via WebFront or scripts
- **Clean Management**: Automatically cleans up old virtual variables when mappings change
- **Full Localization**: German and English language support

---

## Requirements

- IP-Symcon 8.1 or higher

---

## Installation

### Via Module Store (Recommended)

1. Open IP-Symcon Console
2. Navigate to **Modules** > **Module Store**
3. Search for "VariableAggregator" or "Variable Aggregator"
4. Click **Install**

### Manual Installation via Git

1. Open IP-Symcon Console
2. Navigate to **Modules** > **Modules**
3. Click **Add** (Plus icon)
4. Select **Add Module from URL**
5. Enter: `https://github.com/mwlf01/IPSymcon-VariableAggregator.git`
6. Click **OK**

### Manual Installation (File Copy)

1. Clone or download this repository
2. Copy the folder to your IP-Symcon modules directory:
   - Windows: `C:\ProgramData\Symcon\modules\`
   - Linux: `/var/lib/symcon/modules/`
   - Docker: Check your volume mapping
3. Reload modules in IP-Symcon Console

---

## Configuration

After installation, create a new instance:

1. Navigate to **Objects** > **Add Object** > **Instance**
2. Search for "VariableAggregator" or "Variable Aggregator"
3. Click **OK** to create the instance

### Variable Mappings

Configure which variables to include in the virtual device:

| Setting | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Source Variable** | Select any variable from your IP-Symcon installation (optional for standalone variables) |
| **Name** | Display name for the virtual variable (uses source name if empty) |
| **Target Type** | Data type for the virtual variable: Boolean, Integer, Float, or String (cannot be changed after creation) |
| **Sync Direction** | How changes are synchronized: Bidirectional, From Source Only, or To Source Only |
| **Description** | Optional description for documentation purposes |
| **ID** | Auto-generated unique identifier (read-only, format: VA_ID_XXXXXXXX) |

#### Sync Directions

- **Bidirectional**: Changes sync both ways - source changes update the virtual variable, and virtual variable changes are sent back to the source
- **From Source Only**: The virtual variable is read-only and only reflects source changes
- **To Source Only**: Changes to the virtual variable are sent to the source, but source changes don't update the virtual variable

#### Standalone Variables

You can create virtual variables without a source by providing a Name and Target Type. These are useful for manual control or scripting purposes.

---

## Variables

Virtual variables are created dynamically based on your mappings. Each mapped source variable creates a corresponding virtual variable under the instance.

The virtual variables:
- Support actions if sync direction allows writing to source
- Are automatically removed when mappings are deleted

---

## PHP Functions

The module provides the following public functions for use in scripts:

### SyncAllFromSource

Synchronize all virtual variables from their source variables (respects sync direction setting, skips "To Source Only" variables).

```php
VA_SyncAllFromSource(int $InstanceID);
```

**Example:**
```php
// Refresh all virtual variables from source
VA_SyncAllFromSource(12345);
```

### SyncAllToSource

Synchronize all virtual variables to their source variables (respects sync direction setting, skips "From Source Only" variables).

```php
VA_SyncAllToSource(int $InstanceID);
```

**Example:**
```php
// Push all virtual variable values to source
VA_SyncAllToSource(12345);
```

### GetVirtualValue

Get the value of a virtual variable by its identifier.

```php
mixed VA_GetVirtualValue(int $InstanceID, string $Ident);
```

**Parameters:**
- `$InstanceID` - ID of the VariableAggregator instance
- `$Ident` - Identifier of the virtual variable

**Returns:** The current value of the virtual variable

**Example:**
```php
$value = VA_GetVirtualValue(12345, 'VA_ID_12345678');
echo "Value: {$value}";
```

### SetVirtualValue

Set the value of a virtual variable (also syncs to source if allowed).

```php
VA_SetVirtualValue(int $InstanceID, string $Ident, mixed $Value);
```

**Parameters:**
- `$InstanceID` - ID of the VariableAggregator instance
- `$Ident` - Identifier of the virtual variable
- `$Value` - New value to set

**Example:**
```php
// Set a virtual variable and sync to source
VA_SetVirtualValue(12345, 'VA_ID_12345678', true);
```

### GetVirtualVariables

Get a list of all virtual variables with their details.

```php
array VA_GetVirtualVariables(int $InstanceID);
```

**Returns:** Array of virtual variable information

**Example:**
```php
$variables = VA_GetVirtualVariables(12345);
foreach ($variables as $var) {
    echo "Ident: {$var['Ident']}, Name: {$var['Name']}, ID: {$var['VariableID']}\n";
}
```

---

## Use Cases

### 1. Room Dashboard
Consolidate temperature, humidity, light status, and window contacts from different devices into a single "Room" virtual device.

### 2. Device Abstraction
Create a unified interface for similar devices from different manufacturers with different variable types.

### 3. Type Conversion
Convert a float temperature sensor to an integer for simpler display, or convert a boolean to a string for logging.

### 4. Read-Only Mirrors
Create read-only copies of critical variables for visualization without accidental modification.

### 5. Write-Only Controls
Create control interfaces that send commands to devices without reflecting device state changes.

---

## Changelog

### Version 1.0.0
- Initial release
- Variable mapping with bidirectional synchronization
- Data type conversion (Boolean, Integer, Float, String)
- Configurable sync direction per variable
- Standalone variables without source
- Automatic cleanup of removed mappings
- Full German localization

---

## Support

For issues, feature requests, or contributions, please visit:
- [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/mwlf01/IPSymcon-VariableAggregator)
- [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/mwlf01/IPSymcon-VariableAggregator/issues)

---

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## Author

**mwlf01**

- GitHub: [@mwlf01](https://github.com/mwlf01)

Commit message:

Update documentation to clarify name and position preservation behavior

README.md, after:

# VariableAggregator for IP-Symcon

[![IP-Symcon Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/IP--Symcon-8.1+-blue.svg)](https://www.symcon.de)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)

A powerful IP-Symcon module for creating virtual devices that consolidate variables from multiple real devices with bidirectional synchronization and optional data type conversion.

**[Deutsche Version](README.de.md)**

---

## Table of Contents

- [Features](#features)
- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
  - [Variable Mappings](#variable-mappings)
- [Variables](#variables)
- [PHP Functions](#php-functions)
- [Use Cases](#use-cases)
- [License](#license)

---

## Features

- **Variable Consolidation**: Aggregate variables from multiple real devices into a single virtual device
- **Bidirectional Synchronization**: 
  - Changes to source variables are automatically reflected in virtual variables
  - Changes to virtual variables can be synced back to source variables
  - Configurable sync direction per variable (bidirectional, from source only, to source only)
- **Data Type Conversion**:
  - Convert between Boolean, Integer, Float, and String types
  - Automatic intelligent type conversion with sensible defaults
  - Useful for integrating incompatible devices or creating unified interfaces
- **Flexible Naming**: Custom names and descriptions for each virtual variable
- **Standalone Variables**: Create virtual variables without a source for manual control
- **Action Support**: Virtual variables with bidirectional sync can be controlled via WebFront or scripts
- **Clean Management**: Automatically cleans up old virtual variables when mappings change
- **Full Localization**: German and English language support

---

## Requirements

- IP-Symcon 8.1 or higher

---

## Installation

### Via Module Store (Recommended)

1. Open IP-Symcon Console
2. Navigate to **Modules** > **Module Store**
3. Search for "VariableAggregator" or "Variable Aggregator"
4. Click **Install**

### Manual Installation via Git

1. Open IP-Symcon Console
2. Navigate to **Modules** > **Modules**
3. Click **Add** (Plus icon)
4. Select **Add Module from URL**
5. Enter: `https://github.com/mwlf01/IPSymcon-VariableAggregator.git`
6. Click **OK**

### Manual Installation (File Copy)

1. Clone or download this repository
2. Copy the folder to your IP-Symcon modules directory:
   - Windows: `C:\ProgramData\Symcon\modules\`
   - Linux: `/var/lib/symcon/modules/`
   - Docker: Check your volume mapping
3. Reload modules in IP-Symcon Console

---

## Configuration

After installation, create a new instance:

1. Navigate to **Objects** > **Add Object** > **Instance**
2. Search for "VariableAggregator" or "Variable Aggregator"
3. Click **OK** to create the instance

### Variable Mappings

Configure which variables to include in the virtual device:

| Setting | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Source Variable** | Select any variable from your IP-Symcon installation (optional for standalone variables) |
| **Name** | Display name for the virtual variable (uses source name if empty). After creation, manually changed names are preserved unless explicitly overridden in the configuration |
| **Target Type** | Data type for the virtual variable: Boolean, Integer, Float, or String (cannot be changed after creation) |
| **Sync Direction** | How changes are synchronized: Bidirectional, From Source Only, or To Source Only |
| **Description** | Optional description for documentation purposes |
| **ID** | Auto-generated unique identifier (read-only, format: VA_ID_XXXXXXXX) |

#### Sync Directions

- **Bidirectional**: Changes sync both ways - source changes update the virtual variable, and virtual variable changes are sent back to the source
- **From Source Only**: The virtual variable is read-only and only reflects source changes
- **To Source Only**: Changes to the virtual variable are sent to the source, but source changes don't update the virtual variable

#### Standalone Variables

You can create virtual variables without a source by providing a Name and Target Type. These are useful for manual control or scripting purposes.

---

## Variables

Virtual variables are created dynamically based on your mappings. Each mapped source variable creates a corresponding virtual variable under the instance.

The virtual variables:
- Support actions if sync direction allows writing to source
- Are automatically removed when mappings are deleted
- Preserve user-defined name and position after creation (only overwritten when explicitly changed in the configuration)

---

## PHP Functions

The module provides the following public functions for use in scripts:

### SyncAllFromSource

Synchronize all virtual variables from their source variables (respects sync direction setting, skips "To Source Only" variables).

```php
VA_SyncAllFromSource(int $InstanceID);
```

**Example:**
```php
// Refresh all virtual variables from source
VA_SyncAllFromSource(12345);
```

### SyncAllToSource

Synchronize all virtual variables to their source variables (respects sync direction setting, skips "From Source Only" variables).

```php
VA_SyncAllToSource(int $InstanceID);
```

**Example:**
```php
// Push all virtual variable values to source
VA_SyncAllToSource(12345);
```

### GetVirtualValue

Get the value of a virtual variable by its identifier.

```php
mixed VA_GetVirtualValue(int $InstanceID, string $Ident);
```

**Parameters:**
- `$InstanceID` - ID of the VariableAggregator instance
- `$Ident` - Identifier of the virtual variable

**Returns:** The current value of the virtual variable

**Example:**
```php
$value = VA_GetVirtualValue(12345, 'VA_ID_12345678');
echo "Value: {$value}";
```

### SetVirtualValue

Set the value of a virtual variable (also syncs to source if allowed).

```php
VA_SetVirtualValue(int $InstanceID, string $Ident, mixed $Value);
```

**Parameters:**
- `$InstanceID` - ID of the VariableAggregator instance
- `$Ident` - Identifier of the virtual variable
- `$Value` - New value to set

**Example:**
```php
// Set a virtual variable and sync to source
VA_SetVirtualValue(12345, 'VA_ID_12345678', true);
```

### GetVirtualVariables

Get a list of all virtual variables with their details.

```php
array VA_GetVirtualVariables(int $InstanceID);
```

**Returns:** Array of virtual variable information

**Example:**
```php
$variables = VA_GetVirtualVariables(12345);
foreach ($variables as $var) {
    echo "Ident: {$var['Ident']}, Name: {$var['Name']}, ID: {$var['VariableID']}\n";
}
```

---

## Use Cases

### 1. Room Dashboard
Consolidate temperature, humidity, light status, and window contacts from different devices into a single "Room" virtual device.

### 2. Device Abstraction
Create a unified interface for similar devices from different manufacturers with different variable types.

### 3. Type Conversion
Convert a float temperature sensor to an integer for simpler display, or convert a boolean to a string for logging.

### 4. Read-Only Mirrors
Create read-only copies of critical variables for visualization without accidental modification.

### 5. Write-Only Controls
Create control interfaces that send commands to devices without reflecting device state changes.

---

## Changelog

### Version 1.0.0
- Initial release
- Variable mapping with bidirectional synchronization
- Data type conversion (Boolean, Integer, Float, String)
- Configurable sync direction per variable
- Standalone variables without source
- Automatic cleanup of removed mappings
- Full German localization

---

## Support

For issues, feature requests, or contributions, please visit:
- [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/mwlf01/IPSymcon-VariableAggregator)
- [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/mwlf01/IPSymcon-VariableAggregator/issues)

---

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## Author

**mwlf01**

- GitHub: [@mwlf01](https://github.com/mwlf01)
